=======================
GridAPPS-D Introduction
=======================

--------------

1. What is GridAPPS-D?
======================

GridAPPS-D™ is an open-source platform that accelerates development and
deployment of portable applications for advanced distribution management
and operations. It is built in a linux environment using Docker, which
allows large software packages to be distributed as containers. Docker
tools will be discussed in Lesson

The GridAPPS-D™ project is sponsored by the U.S. DOE’s Office of
Electricity, Advanced Grid Research. Its purpose is to reduce the time
and cost to integrate advanced functionality into distribution
operations, to create a more reliable and resilient grid.

GridAPPS-D enables standardization of data models, programming
interfaces, and the data exchange interfaces for:

-  devices in the field
-  distributed apps in the systems
-  applications in the control room

The platform provides

-  robust testing tools for applications
-  distribution system simulation capabilities
-  standardized research capability
-  reference architecture for the industry
-  application development kit

--------------

2. GridAPPS-D Platform Characteristics
======================================

2.1. Vendor / Vendor Platform Independent
-----------------------------------------

The GridAPPS-D Platform and application development environment is
independent of any specific vendor or vendor platform, in other words
vendor neutral. The results of this effort are intended to be useful and
available to any vendor or application developer who wishes to apply
them or incorporate them into existing or future products.

2.2. Standards-based Architecture
---------------------------------

GridAPPS-D is the first platform for energy and distribution management
systems that is designed with standards for data integration, including
data models, programming interfaces, and data exchange interfaces
between grid devices in the field, distributed applications in utility
systems, and applications in utility control rooms. This means that the
applications developed using GridAPPS-D make them broadly applicable and
interchangeable across utility systems, reducing the cost and time for
utilities to integrate new functionality.

To the greatest extent possible, the GridAPPS-D Platform incorporates
and supports industry standards, in particular interoperability
standards, including the power system model representation using the
Common Information Model (CIM) and communications with other platforms /
physical equipment through DNP3, IEEE 2030.5, and the open field
messaging bus (OpenFMB)

2.3. Replicable
---------------

As a reference implementation of a standards-based architecture,
advanced applications and services developed with GridAPPS-D Platform
should be replicable, with the ability to be deployed at multiple
locations on different distribution feeders with almost no code
customization.

2.4. Flexible Distribution Simulation
-------------------------------------

The GridAPPS-D Platform enables users to run real-time quasi-static
simulations of large distribution network models with real-time load
data, thermal co-simulation of houses, real-time weather data, and
real-time operation of switches, DERs, and volt-var control equipment.
The platform supports multiple distribution simulators through a
co-simulation bridge that abstracts the simulation configuration details
to a simple API.

--------------

3. Data Representation & Management
===================================

A key to GridAPPS-D is providing the distribution system application
developer with a standardized approach to data. The intent is to allow
the developer to make logical references to data referencing standard
data models and interfaces without concern for how the data is
physically made available. This standardized, logical data interface is
based on existing standards to the greatest extent possible.

3.1. Standards-based Data Representation
----------------------------------------

The Common Information Model (CIM) is used for all power system models,
which enables rapid exchange of power system models across compliant
applications and services. Using the set of standardized model queries
provided by the PowerGrid Models API, a GridAPPS-D application is able
to scale seamlessly across different network models with no
modifications to the application code.

3.2. Standards-based Data Interfaces
------------------------------------

The GridAPPS-D Platform and GridAPPS-D APIs provide a standardized
method for interfacing with power system model data, real-time
simulation data, historical data, and log data. Each of these APIs
abstract the database specifics, and enable simple queries through a set
of standardized messages formatted as JSON strings.

3.3. Data Translation to Non-standardized Elements
--------------------------------------------------

CIM Hub and the Configuration File API allow conversion of the power
system model data from the standards-based CIM XML format used by the
GridAPPS-D Platform to model formats used by other software packages,
such as GridLAB-D and OpenDSS. This model conversion process can be
performed with a simple set of standardized API calls.

3.4. Available Distribution Feeders
-----------------------------------

The GridAPPS-D platform comes pre-configured with a combination of IEEE
Test Feeders, PNNL Taxanomoy feeders, and other realistic synthetic
models. Additional models and actual utility feeder data can be uploaded
easily as CIM XML files into the GridAPPS-D Platform, which can then be
used for application testing and real-time simulation.

--------------

4. Real-Time Distribution Simulation
====================================

The GridAPPS-D Platform inlcudes a robust real-time distribution
simulator with comparable capabilities to a Dispatcher Training
Simulator. This environment enables application developers to test
algorithms and application code on both the standard realistic sythetic
feeders pre-configured in the GridAPPS-D Platform download and any other
power system models that the user can upload through the CIM Hub
package.

The distribution simulator is the source of data to the distribution
system application developer enabling them to evaluate the performance
of their application with ideal or realistic noisy data under different
operating and performance conditions.

The GridAPPS-D platform currently supports only quasi-static simulation
(i.e. simulation of electromechanical / electromagnetic transients,
variable microgrid island frequency, synchro-check relays, etc. are not
supported currently). These types of simulations can be performed with
GridLAB-D outside of the the GridAPPS-D Platform and application
development environment.

4.1. Real-Time & Faster-than-Real-Time Simulation
-------------------------------------------------

Simulations can be run in two modes:

1) Real-time mode: one second of computer clock time corresponds to one
   second of simulation time. The GridAPPS-D Platform runs the
   simulation in each time and publishes simulation data and sensor
   measurements every three seconds.

2) Faster-than-real-time mode: The GridAPPS-D runs the simulation as
   fast as possible and does not wait for three seconds of computer
   clock time to pass before it publishes the simulation data from the
   current time step. This mode is very useful for creating historical
   training data sets for AI/ML applications.

4.2. Controllable Power System Equipment
----------------------------------------

All of the power system equipment can be controlled in real-time through
the Simulation API, allowing applications to open/close switches,
dispatch DGs / DERs, adjust setpoints of rooftop PV, adjust regulator
taps, and turn capacitor banks on or off.

4.3. Noisy / Bad Data Injection & Communication Failures
--------------------------------------------------------

The GridAPPS-D Platform supports the Sensor Simulator Service, which is
able to inject noise, bad measurements, and data packet losses into the
simulation output. The frequency at which sensors publish can also be
adjusted and aggregated, allowing realistic representation of real
sensors, such as AMI meters that publish data every 15 minutes, rather
than at each simulation time step. This allows the user to train and
evaluate applications with realistic measurement for meters and sensors,
rather than “pure” data created by the power flow solver.

The GridAPPS-D Platform also supports simulation of communication
failures through the Test Manager during which data is not received from
sensors, control commands are delivered to selected equipment, or both.
This enables application developers to test algorithm performance under
realistic conditions, during which physical equipment might not respond
to control commands.

4.4. Reconfigurable Power System Topologies
-------------------------------------------

The GridAPPS-D Platform supports simulation of both meshed and radial
power system topologies, as well as reconfiguration of the power system
network in real-time by opening / closing / tripping of various
switching devices, such as breakers, reclosers, sectionalizers, and
fuses. These switches can be controlled by an application through the
Simulation API or through the GridAPPS-D Viz GUI

4.5. Real-Time Simulation Visualization
---------------------------------------

The GridAPPS-D Platform includes the Viz GUI application, which presents
a simple graphic user interfaces with some of the basic functionalities
found in an Dispatcher Training Simulator, inlcuding a one-line diagram
of the feeder, colorized switch positions, outage locations, alarm
messages, and customizable stripcharts of power flow, node voltage, and
tap position.

--------------

5. Using the GridAPPS-D Platform
================================

GridAPPS-D currently runs in a Linux virtual machine (VM). Although it
can be built from sources, the primary form of distribution is as a set
of Docker containers. Users can install the Docker infrastructure on
their computer and then download the Docker containers. Several platform
usage scenarios are then feasible:

1. Start and run the application through its browser interface.
   Utilities could use the platform this way to evaluate new
   applications, or to evaluate applications on their own circuits. The
   App Hosting Manager allows a user to install and configure new
   applications to run in the platform, by modifying configuration files
   but without having to write new code. GridAPPS-D will also be able to
   ingest any distribution circuit provided in CIM format.

2. Write scripted scenarios and responses using the Test Manager, and
   run those through GridAPPS-D. This mode can be used for a more
   rigorous evaluation, and also for operator training.

3. Write a new application, using one of the open-source examples as a
   template. This mode should provide a faster on-ramp for application
   developers to develop a standards-compliant product.

4. DMS vendors can use the platform to develop and test their own
   standards-compliant interfaces. Any GridAPPS-D code may be
   incorporated into a commercial product, pursuant to its BSD license
   terms. The goal is for an application to be deployable from one
   platform to another, simply by moving the program file(s) and
   updating local configuration files.
